Observability-heavy Axum webserver boilerplate for both rust & rust+wasm templates (#50)
fission-codes/rust-template: rust/README.axum.md

<div align="center">
  <a href="https://github.com/{{github-name}}/{{repo-name}}" target="_blank">

>     <img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/{{github-name}}/{{repo-name}}/main/assets/a_logo.png" alt="{{repo-name}} Logo" width="100"></img>

Reviewer: Not sure why, but these ended up templating in the username for me twice. For the first one, I ended up with

```html
  <a href="https://github.com/bgins/bgins/test-axum-template" target="_blank">
```

Author: oh interesting, will gander.

Reviewer: This was from entering `bgins/rust-template-test` instead of `rust-template` when prompted for the name of the repo.

    </a>{% endif %}
  </p>
</div>

<div align="center"><sub>:warning: Work in progress :warning:</sub></div>

##

## Outline

- [Running the Webserver](#running-the-webserver)
- [Testing the Project](#testing-the-project){% if bench %}
- [Benchmarking the Project](#benchmarking-the-project){% endif %}{% if docker %}
- [Running {{project-name}} on Docker](#running-{{project-name}}-on-docker){% endif %}{% if contributing %}
- [Contributing](#contributing){% endif %}
- [Getting Help](#getting-help)
- [External Resources](#external-resources)
- [License](#license)

## Running the Webserver
{% if nix == false %}
First, due to upstream [Opentelemetry][otel] [dependencies][otel-issue], make
sure to install the [protobuf][protobuf] compiler `protoc`.
Instructions for various platforms can be found [here][protobuf-install].
{% endif %}
To start-up the [axum][axum] webserver, just run:

```console
cargo run
```

This will start-up the service, running on 2 ports:

* `{{port}}`: main `{{project-name}}` application, including `/healthcheck`, etc.
* `{{metricsport}}`: `/metrics`

> Upon running the application locally, (by default) [OpenAPI][openapi]
> documentation is made available as a [swagger-ui][swagger]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Upon running the application locally, [OpenAPI][openapi]
documentation is available as a [swagger-ui][swagger]
```

Is there a way to opt-out of this during template generation? If not, I think "by default" can be removed.

at `http://localhost:{{port}}/swagger-ui/`. Read more in
[Docs and OpenAPI](#docs-and-openapi).

For local development with logs displayed using ANSI terminal colors, we
recommend running:

```console
cargo run --features ansi-logs
```

### Debugging and Diagnostics

To better help diagnose and debug your server application, you can run:

``` console
RUSTFLAGS="--cfg tokio_unstable" cargo run --features console, ansi-logs
```

> This command leverages a compile-time feature-flag, `console`, to give us local

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This command uses a compile-time feature-flag, `console`, to give us local
```

Bit less wordy. 🙂

access to [`tokio-console`][tokio-console], a diagnostics and debugging
tool for asynchronous Rust programs, akin to [pprof][pprof], `htop`/`top`,

> etc. You can install `tokio-console` via `cargo`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
etc. You can install `tokio-console` using `cargo`:
```

``` console
cargo install --locked tokio-console
```

Once executed, just run `tokio-console --retain-for <*>min` to use it and explore.

### Configuration

`{{project-name}}` contains a file for [configuration settings](./config/settings.toml),

> loaded by the application when it starts. Configuration can be overriden via
> environment variablesthat begin with an *APP* prefix. To allow for underscores

Reviewer: ```suggestion
loaded by the application when it starts. Configuration can be overridden using
environment variables that begin with an *APP* prefix. To allow for underscores
```

> in variable names, use separators with 2 underscores between *APP* and the name

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in variable names, use separators with two underscores between *APP* and the name
```

Total nitpick, numbers less than ten should be spelled out.

of the setting, for example:

```bash
export APP__SERVER__ENVIRONMENT="dev"
```

This export would override this setting in the [default config](./config/settings.toml):

```toml
[server]
environment = "local"
```

### Making HTTP Client Requests with [Reqwest][reqwest]

This web framework includes the [reqwest][reqwest] HTTP Client library for

> making requests to external APIs and services, seprate from the `axum` webserver

Reviewer: ```suggestion
making requests to external APIs and services, separate from the `axum` webserver
```

> itself. We leverage the [reqwest-middleware][reqwest-middleware] crate for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
itself. We use the [reqwest-middleware][reqwest-middleware] crate for
```

  to setup the pre-commit hooks locally. This will reduce failed CI builds.
{% endif %}
- If you are doing interim commits locally, and for some reason if you _don't_
  want pre-commit hooks to fire, you can run
  `git commit -a -m "Your message here" --no-verify`.

### Docs and OpenAPI

If you make any changes to [axum][axum] routes/handlers, make sure to add/update
OpenAPI specifications. You can run `cargo run --bin openapi`
to generate an updated specification .json file, located
[here](./docs/specs/latest.json).

An example of adding an OpenAPI specification is the following:

```rust
#[utoipa::path(
    get,
    path = "/ping",
    responses(
        (status = 200, description = "Ping successful"),
        (status = 500, description = "Ping not successful", body=AppError)
    )
)]
pub async fn get() -> AppResult<StatusCode> {
    Ok(StatusCode::OK)
}
  ```

Of note, once you add the [*utoipa*][utoipa] attribute macro to a route,
you should also update the `ApiDoc` struct in [*src/docs.rs*](./src/docs.rs):

``` rust
/// API documentation generator.
#[derive(OpenApi)]
#[openapi(
        paths(health::healthcheck, ping::get),
        components(schemas(AppError)),
        tags(

>             (name = "", description = "fuck service/middleware")

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            (name = "", description = "my-project service/middleware")
```
🧹

level=INFO subject=request category=http.request msg="started processing request" request_path=/ping authorization=null target="project::middleware::logging" location="project/src/middleware/logging.rs:123" timestamp=2023-01-29T15:06:42.188933Z span=2251799813685249 otel.name="GET /ping" http.method=GET http.scheme=HTTP http.client_ip=127.0.0.1:59965 http.flavor=1.1 otel.kind=server http.user_agent=curl/7.85.0 http.host=localhost:3000 trace_id=fa9754fa3142db2c100a8c47f6dd391d http.target=/ping http.route=/ping
level=INFO span_name="HTTP request" span=2251799813685249 span_event=close_span timestamp=2023-01-29T15:06:42.192221Z http.method=GET latency_ms=3 http.client_ip=127.0.0.1:59965 http.host=localhost:3000 trace_id=fa9754fa3142db2c100a8c47f6dd391d http.route=/ping
```

#### How Does Instrumentation Work?

When leveraging [tracing's][tracing] [instrument][tracing-instr] functionality,
we can instrument a function to create and enter a tracing span every time that

> function is called. There are two ways to leverage instrumentation:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
function is called. There are two ways to use instrumentation:
```

let process_span = debug_span!(
    parent: None,
    "process.async",
    subject = "songs.async",
    category = "songs"
);
process_span.follows_from(Span::current());

tokio::spawn(
    async move {
        match context.process().await {
            Ok(r) => debug!(event=?r, "successfully processed song addition"),
            Err(e) => warn!(error=?e, "failed processing song"),
        }
    }
    .instrument(process_span),
);
```

#### Deriving Metrics through Instrumentation

If a function is instrumented with a special `.record` prefix in the `name`
field, then, as part of the its execution, a `counter` will
automatically be incremented and a `histogram` recorded for that
function's span context (start-to-end):

```rust
#[instrument(
    level = "info",
    name = "record.save_event",
    skip_all,
    fields(category="db", subject="postgres", event_id = %event.event_id,
           event_type=%event.event_type,
           metric_name="db_event",
           metric_label_event_type=%event.event_type
    )
    err(Display)
)]
async fn save_event(...) -> ... {
```

These metrics are derived via the [metrics layer](./src/tracing_layers/metrics_layer.rs)

> where the metrics are stripped of the `.record` prefix and then recorded with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
where the metrics are stripped off the `.record` prefix and then recorded with
```

the [metrics-rs][metrics-rs] library:

```rust
let span_name = span
    .name()
    .strip_prefix(METRIC_META_PREFIX)
    .unwrap_or_else(|| span.name());
...
...
metrics::increment_counter!(format!("{name}_total"), &labels);
metrics::histogram!(
    format!("{name}_duration_seconds"),
    elapsed_secs_f64,
    &labels
);
```

#### How is [OTEL][otel] incorporated for exporting (distributed) tracing information?

The [axum-tracing-opentelemetry][axum-otel] crate provides middleware for adding
OTEL integration to a `tower` service, an extended [`Tracelayer`][tower-tracelayer],
setting OTEL span information when `{{project-name}}` application
[routes](./src/routes) are executed.

> OTEL trace information is exported via a [opentelemetry propagation layer][otel-layer],

Reviewer: ```suggestion
OTEL trace information is exported using a [opentelemetry propagation layer][otel-layer],
```

> which is registered along with the other layers, e.g. storage, logging, metrics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
which is registered along with the other layers, for example storage, logging, metrics.
```

> This information is exported over [grpc][grpc], via a Rust implementation of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This information is exported over [grpc][grpc], using a Rust implementation of
```
